import Footnote from '../components/Footnote';
import ReferenceList from '../components/ReferenceList';
import Epigraph from '../components/Epigraph';

# A.I. SUPERINTELLIGENCE: NEAR-TERM REALITY OR HYPE?

<Epigraph>
<p>*"For the first time, we have real competition on the planet. We have
been the most intelligent species by far for tens of thousands of years,
and this is how we got from being an insignificant ape in the corner of
Africa to being the absolute rulers of the planet and of the ecosystem.
And now we are creating something that could compete with us in the very
near future."*</p>

<div className="epigraph-author"><p>Yuval Noah Harari<Footnote number={1} /></p></div>

<p>*"Zuckerberg stated his goal is to develop advanced A.I., which he calls
superintelligence, within the next two or three years."*</p>

<div className="epigraph-author"><p>Meta Platforms CEO Mark Zuckerberg<Footnote number={2} /></p></div>

<p>*"I did sort of see the glittering temptation of Silicon Valley, but
there's a toxic positivity to the culture. The startup ethos out here
runs on positive emotion, and especially **hype.** It needs hype. It
can't function without it. It's not enough that your startup could be
widely adopted. It needs to change the world. It has to be something
that will make everything better. So this ends up becoming an exercise
in meaning-making, and then people start talking about these
startups---their own or other people's---in semi-religious or
explicitly-religious terms."*</p>

<div className="epigraph-author"><p>Adam Becker<Footnote number={3} /></p></div>
</Epigraph>

Are we on the cusp of an all-changing artificial intelligence (A.I.)
tsunami---ushering in, with it, the ultimate competition for planetary
control---within the next decade (if not sooner), or are we the victims
of a sophisticated media- and techno-elite-orchestrated hype? If it is
the former, the near-term world that awaits my grandchildren will be
radically different from today's realities. As my college students will
testify, I tend to lean toward the view that such a comprehensive change
lies just over the horizon. With this in mind, I have written over a
dozen A.I.-related missives over the past half-decade. In other words, I
have consistently advocated that shortly we will see the emergence of an
A.I. superintelligence that will become the leading edge of broader
changes that will challenge existing political, economic *and spiritual*
paradigms.

This past Tuesday (July 22, 2025), for example, on the podcast
*McFiles,* I discussed with the host Christopher MacDonald, what I
consider to be the defining issue of our age. Not the wars in the Middle
East and Ukraine, the Epstein controversy, Russia-gate, or a potential
Marxist running the largest city in the country; but A.I. I began my
remarks near the end of the show by citing a recent article about Elon
Musk's address delivered to a conference of tech-entrepreneurs,
remarking on his political experience with DOGE which he compared to
seeing needles, trash and feces on the beach that you want to clean up.
At the same time, close by, there is a building thousand-foot wall of
water---an "AI tsunami." When it hits, Musk asks, how much are you going
to care about cleaning up the beach?<Footnote number={4} />

An interesting question indeed.

The day after my remarks on the podcast, President Donald Trump unveiled
his administration's "A.I. Action Plan," outlining a vision for American
global dominance in A.I. based on an executive order Trump signed during
his first week in office and on the heels of the so-called Stargate
Project. The plan states that A.I. will augur "an industrial revolution,
an information revolution, and a renaissance---all at once."
Furthermore, the action plan rests on three pillars: enhancing A.I.
innovation, developing more A.I. infrastructure, and promoting American
A.I.<Footnote number={5} />

In the crowd was the *cr√®me-de-crem* of Silicon Valley elites and the
new American A.I. priesthood.

But some have noted the action plan is a huge bet, a gigantic wager
carrying with it the potential of an array of unintended consequences.
If near-future A.I. ends up producing incredible prosperity and new
scientific discoveries---as promised by a number of leading
techno-futurists---then the action plan will be credited for getting
America there faster by removing roadblocks and regulations now seen as
deterring American private entrepreneurship and innovation.

On the other hand, if the technology proves to be a bubble, more hype
than reality, we are approaching a precipice of false hope.

Indeed, I have been starting to see the emergence of contrarian views to
the prevailing wisdom that A.I. is on a non-stoppable trajectory to
achieving a global techno-*Nirvana.* And soon! These observers point out
that A.I. products remain prone to error, extremely expensive to build
(as the ChatGPT euphoria has shown), are relentless energy sponges, and
remain unproven in many business applications.

Moreover, these reservations seem to be growing.

One scientist---astrophysicist Adam Becker---claims that A.I. is based
on concepts of science fiction rather than on actual science. A.I.'s
grip on reality, he contends, is tenuous at best. At the same time,
however, it brands itself as data oriented and scientific. Becker also
warns, among other things: we should not let the tech billionaires push
us toward a future that could never exist; that what he has observed in
Silicon Valley feels "plastic and fake;" and operates under a "toxic
positivity" that asserts that if you make more tech, eventually the tech
will improve itself and become "super-intelligent and godlike." Finally,
according to Becker, the techno-elites believe they are going to bring
about the end of the world and usher in a perfect world---"a kind of
transhumanist, algorithmically-guaranteed utopia"---where every problem
in the world gets reduced to a problem that can be solved with
technology.<Footnote number={6} />

Becker is not alone.

In one recent newspaper article, the author claims that blind tests have
demonstrated that what is perceived as A.I. superiority is actually
self-delusion.<Footnote number={7} />

The same article quotes A.I. critic Gary Marcus: "Recognizing that it
\[A.I.\] sucks in your own specialty, but imagining that it is somehow
fabulous in domains you are less familiar with," is what he describes as
"ChatGPT blindness."<Footnote number={8} />

Just today, before I sent this piece to be turned into a link, an
article by Sam Sivarajan entitled "A billion dollar bet on artificial
intelligence is about to hit reality" (a number of major tech companies
are slashing jobs as they reallocate billions of dollars to fund machine
infrastructure---including GPUs, data centers, cloud platforms and the
electricity to power them---all of which suggests the A.I. payoff may
fall short of the hype).<Footnote number={9} /> And in another one, by Alistair Barr,
"Welcome aboard the 'AI crazy train'" (if the AGI dream fades, companies
will be stuck with massive and costly assets).<Footnote number={10} /> Finally, an
editorial by *MoneyWeek's* editor ("When I was child in the 1980s, I
envisaged the 2020's as an era of flying cars. Instead, we have a wide
array of parking apps that keep crashing and A.I. that still struggles
with basic reasoning").<Footnote number={11} />

Other experts in the field appear to be hedging their bets.
Techno-investor billionaire Peter Thiel, for example, views the current
momentum of A.I. as the only thing preventing "total stagnation" in
technological advancement.<Footnote number={12} /> Thiel, who has said A.I. will be as
transformative as the internet was to the 1990's, asserts that A.I. by
itself may still be not enough to arrest the downward spiral of
technological change which may unravel society.

In addition, other A.I. experts, such as Neil Lawrence, assert that
today's A.I. has more in common with ants than humans.<Footnote number={13} />

So, which will it be?

Choice one: a future techno-paradise. If you listen to A.I.'s
leading-light technocrats and futurists, the 2030's will be interesting
times indeed: large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT will steadily
increase their capabilities; Sam Altman and Dennis Hassabis---the CEOs
of *OpenAI* and *Google DeepMind---*claim the next decade will be
different from any time that came before, with bandwidth brain-computer
interfaces, cured diseases, longer lifespans, new energy sources, and
travel to the stars; and reports that *Meta* announced a \$15 billion
investment to achieve "superintelligence" with CEO Mark Zuckerberg
announcing the launch of *Meta* "Superintelligence Lab" featuring a
group of high-profile AI researchers poached from its AI
competitors.<Footnote number={14} />

Or, choice two: nothing more than an abundance of hype?

Either way, why am I---in the closing years of my life---even concerned?

"Sigh."

To clarify my thinking on this I.A. issue, among other topics that have
garnered my attention, I have been reworking my ten basic assumptions
for what we can expect to happen over the next five-to-ten years. I've
been updating this list of assumptions (which was originally intended to
provide background information for my futuristic trilogy) for over a
decade now. In recent iterations, one particular issue has steadily
moved up the list to become my second assumption: the global quest to
develop, converge and monetize a General Artificial Intelligence
(AGI)---and with it, digital superintelligence---will become a pervasive
quest over the next five years, carrying with it a full range of
unintended consequences. It is poised to become the defining issue of
our age: or as Harari puts it, "we have zero experience in what happens
in AI societies when millions of AIs compete with each other. This is
not something you can simulate. So, in a way, it's the biggest social
experiment in history. And nobody has any idea how it will
develop."<Footnote number={15} />

There is another issue to consider. There is an ongoing arms race to
develop superintelligence between the U.S. and China. As a long-time
observer of Asian geostrategic and technology issues, I noticed with
interest a recent announcement by an unnamed U.S. government source that
the Chinese A.I. company *DeepSeek* is providing user information to the
Chinese surveillance apparatus, employing workarounds to access U.S.
computer chips, and---in the process---has gained access to "large
volumes" of advanced chips.<Footnote number={16} />

What's the big deal?

*DeepSeek,* a Chinese A.I. company based in Hangzhou---China's emerging
version of Silicon Valley---sent shockwaves through Silicon Valley, Wall
Street, and the rest of the technology world in January of this year
claiming it's A.I. reasoning models were on par with (or better than)
U.S. industry-leading models at a fraction of the cost. U.S. officials
assert, however, that *DeepSeek* uses shell companies in Southeast Asia
to evade export controls and access regional data centers to remotely
use U.S. chips.

I am particularly interested in how Singapore is being used in this
regard, because of my experience in the U.S. Embassy in the city-state.
In February of this year, Singaporean authorities charged three men with
fraud concerning the movement of *Nvidia* advanced chips to *DeepSeek.*
The allegations are part of a broader ongoing investigation of over
twenty individuals and companies---with police raids---in the
city-state. Why the charge of criminal conspiracy to commit fraud? The
individuals---two Singaporeans and one Chinese citizen---allegedly made
false representations that the items would not be shipped to a person or
company other than the authorized end users (in this case a
Singapore-based company called *Luxuriate Your Life Pte. Ltd.*).<Footnote number={17} />

I know from personal experience how difficult it is to convince the
Singaporean authorities---always protective of their free-wheeling
economy and trade reputation and ever-cognizant of Chinese influence in
the region---to act on U.S. intelligence outlining export control
violations.

What a strange world!

One of the attendees at the announcement of President Trump's A.I.
Action Plan this week was *Nvidia's* CEO Jensen Huang, fresh on the
heels of his recent trip to China---armed with Trump's permission to
sell his company's advanced GPUs to China---and who received a rock star
status reception in the Middle Kingdom.

As a Christian believer, how should I view A.I.? As I mentioned on the
podcast, we are, in my opinion, witnessing a reemergence of the idols of
old dressed in technological garb. The effort is as old as the human
experience itself: a spirit that motivated the builders of the Tower of
Babel which, in turn, emphasizes human expertise, mathematical advances
and technical expertise to counterfeit God's plan for our lives.

But only Jesus Christ is *the* way, *the* truth, and *the* life.

<ReferenceList references={[
  "[1] Quote from interview with Harari, \"'Sapiens' Author Yuval Noah Harari on the Promise and Peril of AI,\" *The Wall Street Journal (Technology),* Jun 29, 2025.",
  "[2] See, Kim, Tae, \"How Meta's CEO Is Pushing the AI Arms Race to Another Level,\" *Barron's,* Jul 16, 2025.",
  "[3] Morris, Alex, \"What Is Up With These Tech Billionaires? This Astrophysicist Has Answers,\" *Rolling Stone,* Jul 14, 2025 \[an interview with Adam Becker, author of the book *More Everything Forever: AI Overlords, Space Empires, and Silicon Valley's Crusade to Control the Fate of Humanity\].*",
  "[4] Morris, Christian, \"Elon Musk Says He's Done With Politics, Warns About 'Tsunami of AI,'\" *Inc.,* Jun 21, 2025.",
  "[5] Wong, Matteo, \"Donald Trump's Gift to A.I. Companies,\" *The Atlantic (Technology),* Jul 23, 2025; see also, Feiner, Lauren, \"Trump unveils his plan to put A.I. in everything,\" *The Verge,* Jul. 23, 2025; Fernandez, Roshan, \"A.I. Is Dividing the Fortunes of the Magnificent Seven,\" *WSJ,* Jul 20, 2025.",
  "[6] Morris, \"What Is Up.\"",
  "[7] Orlowski, Andrew, \"The great A.I. delusion is falling apart,\" *The Telegraph,* Jul 14, 2025.",
  "[8] *ibid.*",
  "[9] Sivarajan, Sam, \"A billion dollar bet on artificial intelligence is about to hit reality,\" *Global Mail,* Jul 225, 2025.",
  "[10] Barr, Alistair, \"Welcome aboard the 'AI crazy train,'\" *Business Insider,* Jul 25, 2025.",
  "[11] Van Sickle, Andrew, \"Instead of flying cars ..., *MoneyWeek,* Jul 25, 2025.",
  "[12] Scammel, Robert, \"Peter Thiel says there's 'nothing going on' without AI,\" *Business Insider,* Jun 27, 2025.",
  "[13] Wilkens, Alex, \"The AI Expert who says artificial general intelligence is nonsense,\" *New Scientist,* Sep 16, 2024.",
  "[14] Wilkins, Alex, \"Is superintelligent AI just around the corner or just a sci-fi dream,\" *New Scientist,* Jun 13, 2025; and Rollet, Charles, \"Meet the people Zuck hired for his AI superintelligence team,\" *Business Insider,* Jul 1, 2025.",
  "[15] Harari interview.",
  "[16] Martina, Michael and Nellis, Stephen, \"\"Exclusive: DeepSeek aids China's military and evaded export controls, US official says,\" *Reuters (China),* Jun 23, 2025.",
  "[17] Xinghui Kok, \"Singapore charges three with fraud that media link to Nvidia chips,\" *Reuters (Technology),* Feb 28, 2025."
]} />